Article 140. Local self-governing shall be the right of a territorial community – residents of a village or a voluntary association of residents 
of several villages into one village community, residents of a settlement, and 
of a city – for the purposes of an independent settlement of issues of local character in compliance with the Constitution and laws of Ukraine. 
Particular aspects of the exercise of local self-governing in the cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol shall be determined by the special laws of Ukraine. 
Local self-governing shall be exercised by a territorial community 
in compliance with a procedure established by law, both directly and through local self-government bodies: village, settlement and city radas, and their executive bodies. 
Rayon and oblast radas shall be the bodies of local self-government representing the common interests of territorial communities of villages, settlements, and cities. 
The issues of organisation of the administration of city districts shall fall within the competence of city radas. 
Village, settlement, and city radas may permit, at the initiative of residents, the establishment of house, street, block, or other bodies of popular self-organisation, and assign them a part of their own competence, finances, 
or property.

Article 141. Village, settlement, city radas shall comprise deputies elected for a four-year term by residents of village, settlement, city on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. 
Territorial communities shall elect respectively the head of the village, settlement, or city, who shall lead the executive body of the rada and preside at its meetings, for a four-year term, on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot.
The status of heads, deputies, and executive bodies of a rada, their powers, and procedures of their establishment, reorganisation and liquidation shall 
be determined by law. 
The head of a rayon rada and the head of an oblast rada shall be elected 
by the respective rada and shall lead the executive staff of the council.

Article 142. Personal and real estate, revenues of local budgets, other funds, land, natural resources owned by territorial communities of villages, settlements, cities, city districts, and objects of their common property managed by rayon and oblast radas shall be the material and financial basis for local self-government. 
Territorial communities of villages, settlements, and cities may combine objects of communal property as well as budget funds on the basis of agreements in order to implement joint projects or to jointly finance (maintain) communal enterprises, organisations, or establishments, and create appropriate bodies and services for this purpose. 
The State shall participate in the collection of revenues for budgets of local self-governments and financially support local self-governments. Expenditures of local self-government bodies arising from the decisions of state power bodies shall be reimbursed by the State.

Article 143. Territorial communities of a village, settlement, and city, directly or through the local self-government bodies established by them, shall manage the property in communal ownership; approve programmes of socio-economic and cultural development and control the implementation of such programmes; approve budgets of respective administrative and territorial units and control the execution of such budgets; establish local taxes and levies 
in accordance with law; ensure holding of local referendums and implementation of their results; establish, reorganise and liquidate communal enterprises, organisations and institutions and supervise their activity; and settle other issues 
of local importance assigned to their competence by law. 
Oblast and rayon radas shall approve programmes for socio-economic and cultural development of respective oblasts and rayons and control the implementation of such programmes; approve rayon and oblast budgets formed from the funds of the State budget for their appropriate distribution among territorial communities or for the implementation of joint projects and from the funds drawn on the basis of agreement from local budgets for the realisation 
of joint socio-economic and cultural programmes, and control the execution 
of such budgets; settle other issues delegated to their competence by law. 
Certain powers of executive power bodies may be assigned by law to local self-government bodies. The State shall finance the exercise of such powers from the State Budget of Ukraine in full or through the allocation of certain national taxes to a local budget in compliance with a procedure established by law, and transfer the relevant objects of state property to local self-government bodies. 
Local self-government bodies shall be under the control of respective executive power bodies in connection with the exercise of powers of executive power bodies  by such bodies.

Article 144. Local self-government bodies, within the scope determined 
by law, shall adopt decisions mandatory for execution throughout the respective territory. 
In case of nonconformity of decisions of local self-government bodies with the Constitution or laws of Ukraine, such decisions shall be suspended 
in compliance with the procedure established by law with a simultaneous appeal 
to a court.

Article 145. The rights of local self-government shall be protected 
by judicial procedure.

Article 146. Other issues of the organisation of local self-government, and formation, operation and responsibilities of local self-government bodies shall 
be determined by law.