Article 102. 
The President of Ukraine shall be the Head of the State and shall act on behalf of the State.
The President of Ukraine shall be the guarantor of the state sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, the observance of the Constitution of Ukraine, human and citizen rights and freedoms.

Article 103. 
The President of Ukraine shall be elected by the citizens
of Ukraine for a five-year period on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot. 
A citizen of Ukraine, having attained the age of thirty-five, having the right to vote, residing in Ukraine for the past ten years prior to the day of elections, and having command of the state language, may be elected the President of Ukraine. 
The same person may not serve as the President of Ukraine for more than two consecutive terms.
The President of Ukraine shall not have another representative mandate, hold office in State power bodies or associations of citizens, perform any other paid or entrepreneurial activity, and shall not be a member of an administrative body or board of supervisors of an enterprise aimed at making profit. 
Regular elections of the President of Ukraine shall be held on the last Sunday of October of the fifth year of authority of the President of Ukraine. In case of an early termination of the authority of the President of Ukraine, elections of the President of Ukraine shall be held within ninety days from the day of termination of the authority. 
A procedure for holding elections for the President of Ukraine shall 
be established by law.

Article 104. 
The newly elected President of Ukraine shall assume office within thirty days after the official announcement of the results of the election upon taking the oath to the people at a ceremonial meeting of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
The Chairman of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall administer the oath to the President of Ukraine. 
The President of Ukraine shall take the following oath: 
“I, (name and surname), elected by the will of the people as the President 
of Ukraine, assuming this high office, do solemnly swear allegiance to Ukraine. 
I pledge with all my undertakings to protect the sovereignty and independence 
of Ukraine, to provide for the good of the Motherland and the welfare of the Ukrainian people, to protect the rights and freedoms of citizens, to abide by the Constitution of Ukraine and laws of Ukraine, to exercise my duties in the interests of all compatriots, and to enhance the prestige of Ukraine in the world.” 
The President of Ukraine elected by special election shall take the oath within five days after the official announcement of the election results.

Article 105. 
The President of Ukraine shall enjoy the right of immunity for the period of his authority.
Persons guilty of infringing upon the honour and dignity of the President 
of Ukraine shall be liable according to law. 
The title of the President of Ukraine shall be protected by law and shall 
be reserved for the President for life, unless the President of Ukraine has been removed from the office in compliance with a procedure of impeachment.

Article 106. 
The President of Ukraine shall:
 1) ensure the independence, national security, and legal succession of the State; 
 2) address the people, deliver annual and extraordinary speeches on the domestic and foreign situation of Ukraine to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; 
 3) represent the State in international relations, administer the foreign political activity of the State, conduct negotiations and conclude international treaties; 
 4) adopt decisions on the recognition of foreign states; 
 5) appoint and dismiss heads of diplomatic missions of Ukraine to other states and to international organisations; accept credentials and letters of recall 
of diplomatic representatives of foreign states; 
 6) appoint the All-Ukrainian referendum regarding amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine in accordance with Article 156 of this Constitution, and proclaim the All-Ukrainian referendum initiated through the popular initiative; 
 7) designate extraordinary elections to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine within the period determined by this Constitution; 
 8) terminate the authority of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine where during thirty days of a single regular session the plenary meetings failed to commence; 
 9) appoint the Prime Minister of Ukraine upon the consent of Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; terminate the authority of the Prime Minister of Ukraine and shall take a decision on his resignation; 
 10) appoint upon the submission of the Prime Minister of Ukraine the members of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, Heads of other central executive power bodies as well as the Heads of local state administrations and shall terminate their authority in these offices;
 11) appoint upon the consent of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine and dismiss the Prosecutor General of Ukraine;
 12) appoint one half of the membership of the Council of the National Bank of Ukraine;
 13) appoint one half of the membership of the National Council of Ukraine on Television and Radio Broadcasting;
 14) appoint and dismiss upon the consent of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine the Head of Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine, the Head of State Property Fund of Ukraine, the Head of the State Committee on Television and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine;
 15) establish, reorganise and liquidate the ministries upon the submission of the Prime Minister of Ukraine as well as other central executive power bodies acting within funds envisaged for the maintenance of executive power bodies;
 16) revoke acts of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and of Council of Ministers of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea; 
 17) be the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine; appoint and dismiss the high command of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other military formations; administer the national security and defence of the State; 
 18) be the Head of the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine; 
 19) submit to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine a declaration of a state of war, and adopt a decision on the use of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the event of armed aggression against Ukraine; 
 20) adopt, in accordance with law, a decision on the general or partial mobilisation and the introduction of martial law in Ukraine or in its particular territories, in the event of a threat of aggression, or danger to the independence 
of Ukraine; 
 21) adopt, if necessary, a decision on the introduction of a state 
of emergency in Ukraine or in its particular territories, or declare certain territories of Ukraine as zones of ecological emergency situation with the subsequent confirmation of such decisions by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; 
 22) appoint one-third of the members of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine; 
 23) establish courts in compliance with a procedure determined by law; 
 24) confer high military, high diplomatic, and other high special ranks and class orders; 
 25) confer state awards; establish presidential distinctions and confer them; 
 26) adopt decisions on granting the citizenship of Ukraine, termination 
of the citizenship of Ukraine, and on granting asylum in Ukraine; 
 27) grant pardons; 
 28) create, within the limits of the funds stipulated in the State Budget 
of Ukraine, consultative, advisory, and other subsidiary bodies and services assisting in the exercise of Presidential authority; 
 29) sign laws adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; 
 30) have the right to veto laws adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine with their subsequent return for reconsideration by the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine; 
 31) exercise other powers determined by the Constitution of Ukraine. 
The President of Ukraine shall not delegate his powers to other persons 
or bodies. 
The President of Ukraine shall issue decrees and directives mandatory for the execution on the territory of Ukraine on the basis and in pursuance of the Constitution and laws of Ukraine. 
Acts of the President of Ukraine issued within the limits of authority stipulated in items 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24 of this Article shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister of Ukraine and the Minister responsible for the act and its implementation.

Article 107. 
The National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine shall
be the co-ordinating body to the President of Ukraine on the issues of national security and defence. 
The National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine shall co-ordinate and control the activity of executive power bodies in the area of national security and defence. 
The President of Ukraine shall be the Head of the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine. 
The President of Ukraine shall form the personal membership of the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine. 
The Prime Minister of Ukraine, the Minister of Defence of Ukraine, the Head of the Security Service of Ukraine, the Minister of Internal Affairs 
of Ukraine, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, shall be ex officio members of the National Security and Defence  Council of Ukraine. 
The Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine may participate in the meetings of the  National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine. 
Decisions of the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine shall 
be put into effect by decrees of the President of Ukraine. 
The competence and functions of the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine shall be determined by law.

Article 108. 
The President of Ukraine shall exercise his powers until the assumption of office by the newly elected President of Ukraine.
The authority of the President of Ukraine shall be subject to an early termination in cases of: 
 1) resignation; 
 2) inability to exercise presidential authority for health reasons; 
 3) removal from office by the procedure of impeachment; 
 4) death.

Article 109. 
The resignation of the President of Ukraine shall enter into force from the moment when he personally announces the statement of resignation at a meeting of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 110. 
Incapability of the President of Ukraine to exercise his authority for health reasons shall be determined at a meeting of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine and confirmed by a decision adopted by the majority of its constitutional membership on the basis of a written petition of the Supreme Court of Ukraine, upon a recourse of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine and a medical opinion.

Article 111. 
The President of Ukraine may be removed from the office
by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine in compliance with a procedure 
of impeachment if he commits treason or other crime. 
The issue of the removal of the President of Ukraine from the office 
in compliance with a procedure of impeachment shall be initiated by the majority of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. 
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall establish a special ad hoc investigating commission, composed of special prosecutor and special investigators to conduct an investigation. 
The conclusions and proposals of the ad hoc investigating commission shall be considered at the meeting of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. 
On the ground of evidence, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall, by at least two-thirds of its constitutional membership, adopt a decision to bring charges against the President of Ukraine. 
The decision on the removal of the President of Ukraine from the office 
in compliance with the procedure of impeachment shall be adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine by at least three-quarters of its constitutional membership upon a review of the case by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, and receipt of its opinion on the observance of the constitutional procedure 
of investigation and consideration of the case of impeachment, and upon a receipt of the opinion of the Supreme Court of Ukraine to the effect that the acts, of which the President of Ukraine is accused, contain elements of treason or other crime.

Article 112. 
In the event of an early termination of the authority of the President of Ukraine in accordance with Articles 108, 109, 110 and 111 of this Constitution, the discharge of the duties of the President of Ukraine, for the period pending the elections and the assumption of the office by the next President 
of Ukraine, shall be vested on the Prime Minister of Ukraine. The Prime Minister of Ukraine, for the period of discharge of the duties of the President of Ukraine, may not exercise the powers stipulated by items 2, 6 to 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 22, 25, 27 of Article 106 of the Constitution of Ukraine.