Article 154. 
A draft law on making amendments to the Constitution
of Ukraine may be submitted to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine by the President of Ukraine or by the people’s deputies of Ukraine comprising at least one-third 
of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 155.
A draft law on making amendments to the Constitution
of Ukraine, except for Title I General Principles, Title III Elections, Referendum, and Title XIII Making Amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine, previously adopted by the majority of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, shall be deemed adopted, if at least two-thirds of the constitutional members of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine vote in its favour at the succeeding regular session of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 156. 
A draft law on making amendments to Title I General Principles, Title III Elections, Referendum, and Title XIII Making Amendments
to the Constitution of Ukraine, shall be submitted to the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine by the President of Ukraine, or by not less than two-thirds of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, provided that 
it is adopted by at least two-thirds of the constitutional members of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, be approved by an All-Ukrainian referendum called by the President of Ukraine. 
Resubmission of a draft law on making amendments to Titles I, III and XIII of this Constitution, addressing the same issue, shall be possible only 
at a succeeding convocation of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 157. 
The Constitution of Ukraine shall not be amended, if the amendments foresee the abolition or restriction of human and citizen rights and freedoms, or if they are aimed at the liquidation of the independence or violation
of the territorial integrity of Ukraine. 
The Constitution of Ukraine shall not be amended under the conditions 
of martial law or a state of emergency.

Article 158. 
The draft law on making amendments to the Constitution
of Ukraine, having been considered by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine and failing to be adopted, may be submitted to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine no sooner than in one year from the day of the adoption of the decision on this draft law. 
Within the term of its powers, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall not amend twice the same provisions of the Constitution of Ukraine.

Article 159. 
A draft law on making amendments to the Constitution 
of Ukraine shall be considered by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine upon the availability of an opinion of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine on the conformity of such draft law with the requirements of Articles 157 and 158 of this Constitution.