Article 113. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall be the highest body in the executive branch. 
The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall be responsible to the President 
of Ukraine, and under control of and accountable to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, within the limits stipulated in Articles 85, 87 of the Constitution of Ukraine.
The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall be guided in its activities by the Constitution and laws of Ukraine, as well as by acts of the President of Ukraine.

Article 114. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall be composed of the Prime Minister of Ukraine, the First Vice-Prime Minister, three Vice-Prime Ministers and Ministers. 
The Prime Minister of Ukraine shall be appointed by the President of Ukraine upon the consent of more than a half of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
Personal membership of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall be appointed by the President of Ukraine upon the submission of the Prime Minister of Ukraine.  
The Prime Minister of Ukraine shall manage the work of the Cabinet 
of Ministers of Ukraine, direct such work at the implementation of the Programme of Activity of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
The Prime Minister of Ukraine shall submit to the President of Ukraine a proposal on establishment, reorganisation and liquidation of ministries, other central executive power bodies within the limits of the funds envisaged for the maintenance of these bodies.

Article 115. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall renounce its authority before newly elected President of Ukraine. 
The Prime Minister of Ukraine and other members of the Cabinet 
of Ministers of Ukraine shall have the right to announce their resignation to the President of Ukraine. 
Adoption by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine of the resolution of non-confidence in the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall entail the resignation of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine the resignation of which has been accepted by the President of Ukraine, upon his assignment shall continue to exercise its authority pending the commencement of work by the newly formed Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.
The Prime Minister of Ukraine shall be obliged to submit to the President of Ukraine a declaration on resignation of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine upon the decision of the President of Ukraine or in relation to the adoption by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine of a resolution of non-confidence.

Article 116. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall: 
 1) ensure the state sovereignty and economic independence of Ukraine, the implementation of domestic and foreign policy of the State, and the execution 
of the Constitution, laws of Ukraine, and  acts of the President of Ukraine; 
 2) take measures to ensure human and citizen rights and freedoms; 
 3) ensure the implementation of financial, pricing, investment, and taxation policy; the policy in the areas of labour and employment, social security, education, science and culture, environmental protection, ecological safety, and exploitation of natural resources; 
 4) develop and implement national programmes of economic, scientific and technical, social and cultural development of Ukraine; 
 5) ensure equal conditions of development of all forms of ownership; effect management of the state property in accordance with law; 
 6) elaborate a draft law on the State Budget of Ukraine, ensure the implementation of the State Budget of Ukraine approved by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, and submit a report on its implementation to the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine; 
 7) take measures to ensure the defence potential and national security 
of Ukraine, public order, and fight against crime; 
 8) organise and ensure realization of foreign economic activity of Ukraine and the customs practice; 
 9) direct and co-ordinate the work of ministries and other executive authorities; 
 10) carry out other functions, defined in the Constitution and laws of Ukraine, in acts of the President of Ukraine.

Article 117. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall, within the limits 
of its competence, issue directives and resolutions mandatory for execution. 
Acts of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall be signed by the Prime Minister of Ukraine. 
Regulatory legal acts of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, ministries and other central executive authorities shall be subject to registration in compliance with a procedure established by law.

Article 118. The executive power in oblasts and rayons, and in the cities 
of Kyiv and Sevastopol shall be exercised by the local state administrations. 
Particular aspects of exercising executive power in the cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol shall be determined by special laws of Ukraine. 
Local state administration bodies shall be formed by the heads of the local state administrations. 
Heads of local state administrations shall be appointed to and removed from their office by the President of Ukraine upon the submission of proposal by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
In the exercise of their duties, heads of local state administrations shall 
be responsible to the President of Ukraine and to the Cabinet of Ministers 
of Ukraine, and shall be accountable to, and under the control of, executive authorities of a higher level. 
Local state administrations shall be accountable to, and under the control 
of, radas (councils) in the part of the powers delegated to them by the respective rayon or oblast radas. 
Local state administrations shall be accountable to, and under the control 
of, the executive authorities of a higher level. 
Decisions of the heads of local state administrations contradicting the Constitution and laws of Ukraine or other acts of legislation of Ukraine, may 
be revoked by the President of Ukraine or by the head of the local state administration of a higher level in accordance with law. 
An oblast or rayon rada may express non-confidence in the head of the respective local state administration, and on the basis of which the President 
of Ukraine shall adopt a decision and provide a substantiated reply. 
If two-thirds of the deputies of the membership of the respective rada express non-confidence in the head of a rayon or oblast state administration, the President of Ukraine shall adopt a decision on the resignation of the head of the local state administration.

Article 119. Local state administrations in their respective territory shall ensure: 
 1) the execution of the Constitution and laws of Ukraine, acts of the President of Ukraine, acts of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and other executive power bodies; 
 2) legality and legal order; the observance of rights and freedoms of citizens; 
 3) the implementation of state and regional programmes for socio-economic and cultural development, programmes for environmental protection, and, in areas where indigenous peoples and national minorities reside, programmes for their national and cultural development; 
 4) preparation and execution of respective oblast and rayon budgets; 
 5) reporting on the execution of respective budgets and programmes; 
 6) interaction with local self-government bodies; 
 7) the realisation of other powers vested by the State and delegated by the respective radas.

Article 120. Members of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and heads 
of central and local executive power bodies shall have no right to combine their office with other work, except for teaching, research and creative activities outside of working hours, or to be members of an administrative body or board 
of supervisors of an enterprise aiming at making profit. 
The organisation, powers, and operational procedure of the Cabinet 
of Ministers of Ukraine, and other central and local executive power bodies shall be determined by the Constitution and laws of Ukraine.

