1. Laws and other regulatory acts adopted prior to the day the Constitution entered into effect, shall be in force to the extent they do not contradict the Constitution of Ukraine. 
 2. After the adoption of the Constitution of Ukraine, the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine shall exercise the powers stipulated by this Constitution. 
Regular elections to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall be held in March 1998. 
 3. Regular elections for the President of Ukraine shall be held on the last Sunday of October 1999. 
 4. The President of Ukraine, within three years after the date the Constitution of Ukraine entered into force, shall have the right to issue decrees approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and signed by the Prime Minister of Ukraine on economic issues not regulated by laws, with simultaneous submission of the respective draft law to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine 
in compliance with a procedure established by Article 93 of this Constitution. 
Such a decree of the President of Ukraine shall take effect if within thirty calendar days from the day of submission of the draft law (except for the days between sessions), the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine fail to adopt the law or fail 
to reject the submitted draft law by the majority of its constitutional membership, and be effective until a law adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine on these issues enters into force. 
 5. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall be formed in accordance with this Constitution within three months after its entry into force. 
 6. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall be formed in accordance with this Constitution, within three months after its entry into force. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall interpret the laws prior to the appointment of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine. 
 7. Heads of local state administrations, upon the entry of this Constitution into force, shall acquire the status of heads of local state administrations 
in accordance with Article 118 of this Constitution, and after the election 
of chairmen of respective radas, resign from the chairmen positions of these radas. 
 8. Village, settlement, and city radas and the chairmen of these radas, upon entry of this Constitution of Ukraine into force, shall exercise the powers 
as determined by this Constitution until the election of new members of such radas in March 1998. 
Rayon and oblast radas, elected prior to the entry of this Constitution into force, shall exercise the powers as determined by this Constitution, until the formation of the new membership of such radas in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine. 
City district radas and their chairmen, upon entry of this Constitution into force, shall exercise their powers in accordance with law. 
 9. The public prosecution shall, in accordance with effective laws, continue to perform the function of overseeing the observance and implementation of laws and the function of preliminary investigation, until putting into force of laws regulating the activity of state bodies regarding control over the observance of laws, until the formation of a system of pre-trial investigation, and putting into force 
of laws regulating its functioning. 
 10. Prior to the adoption of laws determining the particular aspects of the exercise of executive power in the cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol, in accordance with Article 118 of this Constitution, the executive power in these cities shall 
be exercised by the respective state administrations. 
 11. Paragraph one of Article 99 of this Constitution shall be put into force upon the introduction of the national monetary unit – the hryvnia. 
 12. The Supreme Court of Ukraine and the High Court of Arbitration 
of Ukraine shall exercise their powers in accordance with effective legislation 
of Ukraine, until the formation in Ukraine of a system of courts of general jurisdiction in accordance with Article 125 of this Constitution, provided that the period of such powers shall not exceed five years. 
Judges of all courts in Ukraine elected or appointed prior to the date of entry of this Constitution into force shall continue to exercise their powers in accordance with the effective legislation until the expiration of the period for which they are elected or appointed. 
Judges whose powers have terminated on the day this Constitution enters into force, shall continue to exercise their powers for a period of one year. 
 13. The effective procedures for arrest, retaining in custody, and detention 
of persons suspected of a crime, and also for the examination and search 
of a domicile or other property of a person, shall be preserved for five years after this Constitution enters into effect. 
 14. The use of the existing military bases in the territory of Ukraine for the temporary stationing of foreign military formations shall be possible on the terms of lease, in compliance with a procedure determined by the international treaties 
of Ukraine ratified by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.


The Constitution of Ukraine
was adopted at the Fifth Session of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine
on 28 June 1996