Article 147. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall be the sole body 
of constitutional jurisdiction in Ukraine. 
The Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall resolve the issues of conformity 
of laws and other legal acts with the Constitution of Ukraine and provide the official interpretation of the Constitution of Ukraine and laws of Ukraine.

Article 148. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall comprise eighteen judges of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine. 
The President of Ukraine, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, and the Congress of Judges of Ukraine each shall appoint six judges to the Constitutional Court 
of Ukraine. 
A citizen of Ukraine having forty years of age on the day of appointment, having a higher legal education and professional experience of no less than ten years, having resided in Ukraine for the past twenty years, and having command 
of the state language may be a judge of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine. 
A judge of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall be appointed for 
a single and non-renewable nine-year term. 
The Chairman of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall be elected 
by secret ballot only for one three-year term at a special plenary meeting of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine from among the judges of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine.

Article 149. Guarantees of independence and immunity, grounds for dismissal from the office stipulated by Article 126 of this Constitution, and the requirements concerning incompatibility as determined in paragraph two 
Article 127 of this Constitution shall apply to the judges of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine.

Article 150. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall have the following powers: 
 1) resolve issues of compliance with the Constitution of Ukraine (constitutionality) of: 
laws and other legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; 
acts of the President of Ukraine; 
acts of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine; 
legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. 
Such issues shall be considered upon request from: the President of Ukraine; no less than forty five people’s deputies of Ukraine; the Supreme Court 
of Ukraine; the Authorised Human Rights Representative to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; or the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea; 
 2) the official interpretation of the Constitution of Ukraine and laws 
of Ukraine; 
On matters stipulated by this Article, the Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall adopt decisions mandatory for execution throughout the territory of Ukraine, and such decisions shall be final and shall not be appealed.

Article 151. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall, upon request of the President of Ukraine or the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, provide opinions 
on the conformity with the Constitution of Ukraine of the effective international treaties of Ukraine, or of international treaties submitted to the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine for approval of their binding nature. 
The Constitutional Court of Ukraine shall provide an opinion on the observance of the constitutional procedure of investigation and consideration of the case of removing the President of Ukraine from office by the procedure 
of impeachment upon request of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 152. Laws and other legal acts, according to a decision of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, shall be deemed unconstitutional, whether 
in whole or in part, should such laws and legal acts fail to comply with the Constitution of Ukraine, or in case of a violation of a procedure established by the Constitution of Ukraine for the review, adoption, or entry into force of such laws and legal acts. 
Laws and other legal acts or their particular provisions being deemed unconstitutional shall lose their legal force from the day of adoption of the decision on their unconstitutionality by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine. 
Material or moral damages caused to physical or juridical persons by the acts or actions deemed to be unconstitutional shall be compensated for by the State in compliance with a procedure established by law.

Article 153. A procedure for the organisation and operation of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, and a procedure for consideration of cases by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, shall be determined by law.