Article 75. The sole body of legislative power in Ukraine shall be the parliament – the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 76. The constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine shall comprise 450 people’s deputies of Ukraine elected on the basis 
of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for the term of four years. 
A citizen of Ukraine having attained to the age of twenty-one as of the day of elections, having the right to vote, and having resided in the territory of Ukraine for the past five years, may be elected people’s deputy of Ukraine.
A citizen who has a criminal record of committing an intentional crime shall not be elected to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine if the record has not been nullified in compliance with a procedure established by law.
The powers of the people’s deputies of Ukraine shall be determined by the Constitution and the laws of Ukraine.
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall retain its power for a five-year term.

Article 77. Regular elections to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall 
be held on the last Sunday of the last of March of the fourth year of the term of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
Early elections to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall 
be appointed by the President of Ukraine and shall be held within sixty day period from the day of publication of the decision on the early termination of the powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. 
The procedure for electing the people’s deputies of Ukraine shall 
be established by law.

Article 78. The people’s deputies of Ukraine shall exercise their powers 
on a permanent basis.
The people’s deputies of Ukraine shall not have another representative mandate or be involved in the civil service 
Requirements concerning the incompatibility of the mandate of the deputy with other types of activities shall be established by law.
Should any circumstances arise to be in breach with the requirements concerning the incompatibility of the mandate of the deputy with other types 
of activity, the people’s deputy of Ukraine shall, within twenty days after the commencement of such circumstances, terminate his activities or file a personal application to abdicate his position as the people’s deputy of Ukraine.


Article 79. Prior to assuming office, people’s deputies of Ukraine shall take the following oath before the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine: 
“I swear allegiance to Ukraine. I commit myself with all my deeds to protect the sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, to provide for the good of the Motherland and for the welfare of the Ukrainian people. 
“I swear to abide by the Constitution of Ukraine and the laws of Ukraine, 
to discharge my duties in the interests of all fellow-citizens.” 
The oath shall be read by the oldest people’s deputy of Ukraine before the opening of the first session of the newly elected Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, upon which the deputies shall affirm the oath with their signatures below the text of the oath.
A refusal to take the oath shall result in the loss of the deputy’s mandate. 
The powers of people’s deputies of Ukraine shall commence immediately upon taking of the oath.

Article 80. The people’s deputies of Ukraine shall be guaranteed immunity of a deputy. 
The people’s deputies of Ukraine shall not be held legally liable for the results of voting or for statements made in the parliament and in its bodies, save 
as the liability for an insult or defamation. 
The people’s deputies of Ukraine shall not be held criminally liable, detained or arrested without the consent of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 81. The powers of the people’s deputies of Ukraine shall terminate simultaneously with the termination of the powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. 
The powers of a people’s deputy of Ukraine shall be subject to early termination in the event of: 
1) resignation by virtue of a personal statement; 
2) guilty verdict against him/her entering into legal force; 
3) court declaring them legally incapable or missing; 
4) termination of his citizenship or his departure from Ukraine for permanent residence abroad; 
5) his/her death 
A decision about early termination of a people’s deputy’s powers shall be adopted by the majority of the constitutional composition of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.   
In case of failure to fulfil the condition on the incongruity of people’s deputy’s mandate with other types of activities the powers of the people’s deputy of Ukraine shall be early terminated under the Law and upon the decision of the court.

 Article 82. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall work in sessions.

The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall be legally constituted provided that 
at least two-thirds of its constitutional membership has been elected.

The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall convene its first session no later than on the thirtieth day after the official announcement of the election results.

The first meeting of the newly elected Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall 
be opened by the  oldest people’s deputy of Ukraine.
The procedure of work of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall be established by the Constitution of Ukraine and the law on the Rules of Procedure of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 83. Regular sessions of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall commence on the first Tuesday of February and on the first Tuesday of September each year.
Extraordinary sessions of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall be convened, mentioning the agenda, by the Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine at the request of at least one-third of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine or at the request of the President of Ukraine.
In case of introduction of martial law or a state of emergency in Ukraine, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall hold a meeting within two days without convocation.
If the term of powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine expires while martial law or a state of emergency is in effect, its powers shall be extended until the day of the first meeting of the first session of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine elected after the cancellation of martial law or of the state of emergency.

Article 84. Sittings of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall be held openly. A closed sitting shall be held subject to a decision of the majority of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. 
Decisions of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall be adopted exclusively 
at its plenary sittings by voting. 
Voting at the meetings of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall be performed by a people’s deputy of Ukraine in person.

Article 85. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall have the following powers: 
 1) to introduce amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine within the limits and in compliance with the procedure stipulated in Title XIII of this Constitution; 
 2) to call the All-Ukrainian referendum on issues indicated in Article 73 
of this Constitution;
 3) to adopt laws; 
 4) to approve the State Budget of Ukraine and amend it; to supervise the execution of the State Budget of Ukraine and to adopt decisions on reporting concerning its execution.
 5) to establish the principles of domestic and foreign policy;
 6) to approve national programmes for economic, scientific, technical, social, national, and cultural development and protection of the environment;
 7) to call elections for the President of Ukraine within the period stipulated by this Constitution;
 8) to hear annual and extraordinary addresses of the President of Ukraine 
on the domestic and foreign situation of Ukraine;
 9) to declare war, upon the recommendation made by the President 
of Ukraine, and make peace, approve a decision of the President of Ukraine on the use of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other military formations in the event 
of armed aggression against Ukraine;
 10) to remove the President of Ukraine from the office in accordance with 
a special procedure (impeachment) established by the Article 111 of this Constitution;
 11) to consider and adopt decisions on the approval of the Programme 
of Activity of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine;
 12) to give a consent to the appointment of the Prime Minister of Ukraine by the President of Ukraine;
 13) to monitor the activities of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine 
in accordance with this Constitution and law;
 14) to approve decisions on granting loans and economic aid by Ukraine 
to foreign states and international organisations as well as decisions on receiving loans by Ukraine, other than those stipulated by the State Budget of Ukraine, from foreign countries, banks, and international financial organisations, and oversee the utilisation of such loans;
 15) appointment or election, removal from offices, giving consent to the appointment and removal from offices of the persons in cases provided for in the Constitution;
 16) to appoint and remove from the office the Chairman and other members of the Chamber of Accounts;
 17) to appoint and remove from the office the Authorised Human Rights Representative to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; and to hear the Representative’s annual reports on the state of affairs in the sphere of observance and protection 
of human rights and freedoms in Ukraine;
 18) to appoint and remove from the office the Chairman of the National Bank of Ukraine upon the recommendation made by the President of Ukraine;
 19) to appoint and remove from the office half the total members of the Council of the National Bank of Ukraine;
 20) to appoint and remove from the office half the total members of the National Council of Ukraine on Television and Radio Broadcasting;
 21) to appoint to the office and withhold the powers of members of the Central Election Commission on the submission from the President of Ukraine;
 22) to approve the general structure, number, to define the functions of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, of the Security Service of Ukraine and other military formations established in accordance with the laws of Ukraine, as well as of the Ministry of Interior of Ukraine; 
 23) to approve decisions on military assistance to other states, 
on dispatching the Ukrainian Armed Forces units to another states or on admitting units of armed forces of other states to the territory of Ukraine;
 24) to give consent for the appointment and removal from the office of the Head of Antimonopoly Committee of Ukraine, of the Head of State Property Fund of Ukraine, of the Head of State Committee on Television and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine by the President of Ukraine;
 25) to give consent for the appointment by the President of Ukraine of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine; declaring no confidence in the Prosecutor General of Ukraine resulting in his resignation from the office;
 26) to appoint one-third of the members of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine;
 27) to elect judges for indefinite terms;
 28) to terminate early the powers of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea on the basis of an opinion of the Constitutional Court 
of Ukraine concerning the violation of the Constitution or laws of Ukraine by the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea; to call extraordinary elections for the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea;
 29) to establish and abolish rayons (districts), to establish and alter rayons and cities boundaries, as well as to grant the status of city to inhabited localities, name and rename of inhabited localities and rayons;
 30) to call regular and extraordinary elections to local self-government bodies;
 31) to approve, within a two day period from the date of submission by the President of Ukraine of the decrees on introduction of martial law or the state 
of emergency in Ukraine or in its particular areas, on total or partial mobilisation, and on declaring particular areas as zones of ecological emergency situations; 
 32) to grant consent within a period provided for by the law to the binding character of international treaties of Ukraine, and to denounce international treaties of Ukraine;
 33) to exercise parliamentary control within the limits established by this Constitution;
 34) to adopt decisions on forwarding an inquiry to the President of Ukraine at the request of a people’s deputy of Ukraine, a group of people’s deputies, 
or a Committee of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine previously supported by at least one-third of the constitutional members of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine;
 35) to appoint and remove from the office the Head of Staff of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; approve the budget of the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine and the structure of its staff;
 36) to adopt the list of objects of the state property not subject 
to privatisation and establish legal principles regarding the expropriation of private property;
  
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall exercise other powers specified within the frame of reference of the Verkhovna Rada in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine.

Article 86. At a session of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, a people’s deputy of Ukraine shall have the right to make inquiries to bodies of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, heads of other state and local self-government bodies, as well as heads of enterprises, institutions, and organisations located in the territory of Ukraine, irrespective of their subordination and forms of ownership. 
Heads of state power and local self-government bodies, heads of enterprises, institutions, and organisations shall be obliged to notify a people’s deputy 
of Ukraine of the results of their inquiry.

Article 87. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine upon the proposal of at least one-third of the constitutional membership of the people’s deputies of Ukraine, may consider an issue concerning responsibility of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine or adopt a resolution of non-confidence in the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine by the majority of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. 
The issue of the responsibility of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall not be considered by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine more than once during same regular session, or within one year after the approval of the Programme of Activity of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.

Article 88. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall elect from among its members the Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, the First Vice-Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, and shall recall them. 
The Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall: 
 1) preside at the meetings of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; 
 2) organise the preparation of issues for consideration by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine;
 3) sign acts adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine;
 4) represent the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine in relations with other State power bodies of Ukraine and with the agencies of other states;
 5) organise the work of the staff of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
The Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall exercise the powers, stipulated by this Constitution in compliance with the procedure established by the Law on Rules of Procedure of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 89. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall adopt a list of Committees of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, shall elect the chairmen of these Committees. 
The Committes of the Verkhovna Rada shall carry out legislative work, shall prepare and preliminary consider the issues relating to the powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine within the framework of its powers may establish ad hoc Commissions of Inquiry for preparation and preliminary consideration of issues.
To investigate issues of public interest, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall establish the ad hoc Commissions of Inquiry, provided that at least one-third of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine has voted in favour thereof. 
The conclusions and proposals of the ad hoc Commissions of Inquiry shall not be decisive for investigation or court. 
The organisation and operational procedure of Committees of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, and its ad hoc Special Commissions and the ad hoc Commissions of Inquiry shall be determined by law.

Article 90. The powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall 
be terminated on the day of the opening of the first meeting of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine of a new convocation. 
The President of Ukraine may early terminate the powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine where during thirty days of single regular session the plenary meeting fail to commence.
The powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine elected at extraordinary elections held after the early termination of powers of the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine of the previous convocation by the President of Ukraine may not 
be terminated within one year from the date of its election. 
The powers of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine may not be subject 
to an early termination within the last six months of the term of powers of the President of Ukraine.

Article 91. The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall adopt laws, resolutions, and other acts by the majority of its constitutional membership, unless otherwise stipulated by this Constitution.

Article 92. The following matters shall be determined exclusively by laws of Ukraine: 
 1) human and citizen rights and freedoms, the guarantees of these rights and freedoms; the main duties of the citizen; 
 2) citizenship, the legal personality of citizens, the status of foreigners and stateless persons; 
 3) the rights of indigenous peoples and national minorities; 
 4) a procedure for the use of languages; 
 5) the principles of the use of natural resources, the exclusive (maritime) economic zone and the continental shelf, the exploration of outer space, the organisation and operation of power supply systems, transport, and communications; 
 6) the fundamentals of social protection, the forms and types of pension; the principles of the regulation of labour and employment, marriage, family, the protection of childhood, motherhood, and fatherhood; upbringing, education, culture, and health care; ecological safety; 
 7) the legal framework for property; 
 8) legal principles and guarantees for entrepreneurship; rules of competition and provisions on antimonopoly regulation; 
 9) the principles of foreign relations, foreign economic activity, and customs practices; 
 10) the principles of demographic and migration processes regulation; 
 11) the principles of the establishment and activity of political parties, other associations of citizens, and the mass media; 
 12) the organisation and activity of executive power bodies, the fundamentals of civil service, the organisation of state statistics and information; 
 13) the territorial structure of Ukraine; 
 14) the judicial system, judiciary, the status of judges, the principles 
of judicial expertise, the organisation and operation of the prosecutor’s office, the bodies of inquisition and investigation, the notary, the bodies and institutions for the enforcement of punishments; the fundamentals of the organisation and activity of advocates; 
 15) the principles of local self-governance; 
 16) the status of the capital of Ukraine; the special status of other cities; 
 17) the fundamentals of national security, the formation of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and ensuring public order; 
 18) the legal regime of the state border; 
 19) the legal regime of martial law and state of emergency, zones 
of ecological emergency situations; 
 20) the organisation and procedure for conducting elections and referendums; 
 21) the organisation and operational procedure of the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine, the status of people’s deputies of Ukraine; 
 22) the principles of civil legal liability; acts deemed crimes, administrative or disciplinary offences, and liability for the same.
The following matters shall be established exclusively by laws of Ukraine: 
 1) the State Budget of Ukraine and the budgetary system of Ukraine; the system of taxation, taxes and levies; the principles of the formation and operation of financial, monetary, credit, and investment markets; the status of the national currency and the status of foreign currencies on the territory of Ukraine; 
a procedure for the formation and settlement of state domestic and foreign debt; and a procedure for the issue and circulation of state securities, and their types and forms; 
 2) a procedure for dispatching units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine to other states; and a procedure for admitting and the terms for stationing units of armed forces of other states on the territory of Ukraine; 
 3) units of weight, measure and time; a procedure for the establishment 
of state standards; 
 4) a procedure for the use and protection of State symbols; 
 5) state awards; 
 6) military, diplomatic, and other special ranks; 
7) public holidays; 
 8) a procedure for the establishment and functioning of free and other special zones having an economic and migration regime other than the general regime.
Amnesty shall be declared by a law of Ukraine.

Article 93. The right of legislative initiative in the Verkhovna Rada 
of Ukraine shall be vested on the President of Ukraine, people’s deputies 
of Ukraine, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the National Bank of Ukraine. 
Draft laws defined by the President of Ukraine as urgent shall be considered out of turn by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

Article 94. The Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall sign 
a law and forward it without delay to the President of Ukraine. 
The President of Ukraine shall sign such law within fifteen days of its receipt, accepting it for execution, and shall officially promulgate it or return to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine with substantiated and formulated proposals for reconsideration. 
Should the President of Ukraine fail to return a law for reconsideration within the established period, such law shall be deemed approved by the President of Ukraine and shall be signed and officially promulgated. 
Where during the reconsideration the law shall be anew adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine by at least two thirds of its constitutional membership, the President of Ukraine shall be obliged to sign the law and to promulgate it officially within ten days. 
A law shall enter into force in ten days after the date of its official promulgation, unless otherwise stipulated by such law, provided that such other date shall not be earlier than the date of publication of such law.

Article 95. The budgetary system of Ukraine shall be based on the principles of fair and impartial distribution of social wealth among citizens and territorial communities. 
Any state expenditures for the needs of the entire society, and the extent and purposes of such expenditures shall be determined exclusively by the law on the State Budget of Ukraine. 
The State shall strive for balanced budget of Ukraine. 
Regular reports on revenues and expenditures of the State Budget of Ukraine shall be made public.

Article 96. The State Budget of Ukraine shall be annually approved by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine for the period from the 1 January to 31 December, 
or for a different period under special circumstances.
The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall submit a draft law on the State Budget of Ukraine for the succeeding year to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine not later than 15 September of each year. The report on the course of the execution of the State Budget of Ukraine in the current year shall be submitted along with the draft law.

Article 97. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall submit a report on the execution of the State Budget of Ukraine to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine 
in accordance with law. 
The submitted report shall be made public.

Article 98. The Chamber of Accounts shall, on behalf of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, exercise control over the use of funds of the State Budget 
of Ukraine.

Article 99. The currency unit of Ukraine shall be hryvnia. 
Ensuring the stability of the currency unit shall be the major function of the central bank of the State – the National Bank of Ukraine.

Article 100. The Council of the National Bank of Ukraine shall develop the basic principles of monetary and credit policy, and control its implementation. 
The legal status of the Council of the National Bank of Ukraine shall 
be determined by law.

Article 101. Parliamentary oversight of the protection of human and citizen constitutional rights and freedoms shall be conducted by the Authorized Representative to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine on Human Rights.